Dyanapr QPS is the brand name of a topical diclofenac solution manufactured by Troikaa Pharmaceuticals Ltd., India. Dynapar QPS is a Quick Penetrating Solution of diclofenac, which makes use of the QPS Novel Drug Delivery Platform. Dynapar QPS and Dynapar QPS Plus represent a major advance over gels and aerosol sprays, the use of which results in much of the active drug applied topically remaining on the skin due to the lack of transdermal penetration. The QPS formulation enables prompt absorption of diclofenac at the site of application, leading to high levels of the medicine in the tissue surrounding the application area. Better transdermal penetration is achieved through enhanced paracellular movement of the QPS base within which diclofenac is solubilised.


== Medical Uses ==
Dynapar QPS contains a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) drug used to treat mild to moderate pain and inflammation, particularly musculoskeletal pain. It is the world’s first transdermal preparation of diclofenac solution, providing superior pain relief after topical application by enhancing the penetration of diclofenac through the skin. The preparation is backed by proof of concept pharmacokinetic studies, as well as clinical trials. Since Dynapar QPS provides prompt pain relief upon being applied to any inflamed area (knee, back, elbow, neck, ankle, etc.), it minimizes or eliminates the patient's requirement of oral pain killers. Dynapar QPS, therefore, brings a paradigm shift in the management of musculoskeletal pain.


== How it works ==
Dynapar QPS is a quick penetrating solution of diclofenac, based on the QPS Novel Drug Delivery Platform. The QPS formulation enables quick absorption of diclofenac at the site of topical application, leading to high levels of the drug in the tissue surrounding the site of application. Better transdermal penetration is achieved through enhanced paracellular movement of the QPS base within which diclofenac is solubilised. The mechanism of penetration of QPS is paracellular transport across the stratum corneum which provides enhanced penetration into the skin. QPS technology utilizes a unique base in which the drug is solubilised. The base gets absorbed into the skin, carrying the solubilised drug through the barrier of the stratum corneum. Being non-aqueous, the QPS base passes through the paracellular lipid matrix, thereby providing enhanced penetration. The excipient, and its proportion in the QPS base, has been optimized after a series of pharmacokinetic studies. The optimized formulation provides adequate transdermal penetration.


== Pharmacokinetics ==
Absorption: A study was conducted in 18 healthy male volunteers to evaluate pharmacokinetic parameters. 5 ml DYNAPAR QPS (200 mg of diclofenac) was applied over the back of volunteers. The maximum plasma concentration of diclofenac was 175.93± 89.49 ng/ml while time to reach maximum plasma concentration was 5.24 ± 2.59 hours. AUC0-t was found to be 1224.19 ± 445.69 hr.ng/ml while AUC0-inf was 1718.21 ± 740.58 hr.ng/ml. Distribution: Diclofenac is more than 99% bound to human serum proteins, primarily to albumin. Diclofenac diffuses into and out of the synovial fluid. Metabolism: The major diclofenac metabolite, 4'hydroxy-diclofenac, has very weak pharmacological action. The formation of 4’-hydroxy diclofenac is primarily mediated by CPY2C9. Both diclofenac and its metabolites undergo glucuronidation or sulfation followed by biliary excretion. CYP3A4 is responsible for the formation of minor metabolites, 5-hydroxy and 3’-hydroxy- diclofenac. Elimination: Diclofenac is eliminated through urinary and biliary excretion of the glucuronide and the sulphate conjugates of the metabolites. Little or no free unchanged diclofenac is excreted in the urine.


== Dosage and administration ==
Dynapar QPS delivers 4 mg of diclofenac in each actuation (pump stroke). Dynapar QPS PLUS delivers 2 mg of diclofenac in each actuation. Each pump stroke delivers 0.1ml of the solution.
The recommended dose of Dynapar QPS and Dynapar QPS PLUS is 4 sprays 4 times daily.


== References ==